---
sidebar_position: 3
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Modifiers

A type of word that describes a verb or noun.

## Prepositions

There are only a couple prepositions applicable to the modifier class of words.

### Negatitive

The %%wë@wë%%/%%ʒʇ@wë%% particle allows you to specify that any content word
which is being used as a modifier is seen as negated in meaning when applied
as a modifier to the preceding head phrase.

### Collapsing Head

The %%wo@wo%%/%%ʒ@wo%% particle allows you to specify that any content word
being used as a modifier is seen as applying meaning to the *entire* noun or
verb phrase instead of only being applicable to the preceding head phrase.

## From...

Converting from the other content types into modifiers.

### Nouns

When a noun acts as a modifier, it means that the head word is somehow related
to the noun (acting as a modifer) or shares some recognizable quality with the
noun. Like the affix "-like" in English. One way of making a modifier out of a
noun is to provide it as a word immediately following %%vın@vın%%/%%ɤ̃ȷ@vın%%.
This has the effect of meaning "[noun]-like thing" in English. You can use it
following any head word including verbs.


### Verbs

When a verb acts as a modifier, it means that the head word can be used as an
object in the verb's action. Like "-able" in English but also there are many
concrete terms that English has to refer to these "able to X" modifiers. The
modified head word can now be considered as something that can be a direct
object, patient and theme in a sentence where you use that verb as the
predicate.


## Relative Clauses

You can modify a preceding verb or noun phrase by using one of the relative
clause particles:

<Tabs groupId="popöun-kon-cukto" queryString>
    <TabItem value="latin" label="Latin" default>
        <ol>
          <li>%%do@do%% - Use this one when the subject is shared from the outer sentence</li>
          <li>%%vos@vos%% - Use this one when the subject is changed from the outer sentence</li>
        </ol>
    </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="opügido" label="ɽʋʄꜿɟʌ">
        <ol>
          <li>%%ʌ@do%% - Use this one when the subject is shared from the outer sentence</li>
          <li>%%ɤ́@vos%% - Use this one when the subject is changed from the outer sentence</li>
        </ol>
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

When you use the second form (%%vos@vos%%/%%ɤ́@vos%%), you must provide at least
one constituent that refers to the verb or noun phrase, this is called the
**resumptive phrase**. Hisyëö uses the demonstratives as resumptive pronouns
within resumptive phrases. Use the proximal demonstrative
(%%övo@övo%%/%%ɽıɤ@övo%%) when referring to the speaker or objects that the
speaker possesses, use the medial demonstrative (%%ulyö@ulyö%%/%%ɽ͊ʃɀı@ulyö%%)
when referring to the person being addressed or objects possesed by that person,
use the distal demonstrative (%%onö@onö%%%%ɽƨı@onö%%) when referring to someone
else other than the person being addressed or objects possessed by that third
party.

<Tabs groupId="popöun-kon-cukto" queryString>
    <TabItem value="latin" label="Latin" default>
        <p>%%vıyüxit@vıyüxit%% %%hoi@hoi%% %%sëdu@sëdu%% %%muni@muni%% %%ü@ü%% %%umo@umo%% %%wohi@wohi%% %%do@do%% %%nıwos@nıwos%% %%hoi@hoi%% %%zınkon@zınkon%% %%uklo@uklo%%. "The woman who lives next door works in a bank."</p>
        <p>%%ü@ü%% %%ulyö@ulyö%% %%lı@lı%% %%non@non%% %%vos@vos%% %%völun@völun%% %%ü@ü%% %%noyo@noyo%% %%cö@cö%% %%do@do%% %%möniso@möniso%% %%cö@cö%% %%övo@övo%% %%müt@müt%% %%nimü@nimü%%. "This is the video that I wanted to show you."</p>
        <p>%%yöüli@yöüli%% %%ëto@ëto%% %%ü@ü%% %%umo@umo%% %%vos@vos%% %%dëko@dëko%% %%xopëk@xopëk%% %%ü@ü%% %%loı@loı%% %%cö@cö%% %%onö@onö%%. "The person they spoke to was really helpful."</p>
    </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="opügido" label="ɽʋʄꜿɟʌ">
        <p>%%ɤȷɀʄɋ̆ɟ@vıyüxit%% %%ɂɽɟ@hoi%% %%ɐʇʌʃ@sëdu%% %%ƶʃƨɟ@muni%% %%ɽʄ@ü%% %%ɽʃƶ@umo%% %%ʒɂɟ@wohi%% %%ʌ@do%% %%ƨȷʒ́@nıwos%% %%ɂɽɟ@hoi%% %%ⱴ̃ȷɔ̃@zınkon%% %%ɽ̑ʃʓ@uklo%%. "The woman who lives next door works in a bank."</p>
        <p>%%ɽʄ@ü%% %%ɽ͊ʃɀı@ulyö%% %%ʓȷ@lı%% %%ƨ̃@non%% %%ɤ́@vos%% %%ɤıʓ̃ʃ@völun%% %%ɽʄ@ü%% %%ƨɀ@noyo%% %%ꞇı@cö%% %%ʌ@do%% %%ƶıƨɟɐ@möniso%% %%ꞇı@cö%% %%ɽıɤ@övo%% %%ƶ̆ʄ@müt%% %%ƨɟƶʄ@nimü%%. "This is the video that I wanted to show you."</p>
        <p>%%ɀıɽʄʓɟ@yöüli%% %%ɽʇc@ëto%% %%ɽʄ@ü%% %%ɽʃƶ@umo%% %%ɤ́@vos%% %%ʌʇɔ@dëko%% %%ɋʋ̑ʇ@xopëk%% %%ɽʄ@ü%% %%ʓɽȷ@loı%% %%ꞇı@cö%% %%ɽƨı@onö%%. "The person they spoke to was really helpful."</p>
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>