---
sidebar_position: 1
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Nouns

A type of word that represents an entity (tangible or intangible). Can be
represented by a Noun Phrase (NP) which contains a nucleus and surrounding
quantifiers and modifiers.

## Roles

### Causer / Voluntary Subject

The %%ü@ü%%/%%ɽʄ@ü%% particle precedes this noun phrase.

During causative sentences, a NP with this role represents the *causer*.
Otherwise, an NP with this role will be the **agent** or **experiencer** of the
action. The nature of this role is that the marked noun phrase is making the
choice to commit the act of the predicate of their own free will. 

When used with the negatitive particle (%%yök / ɀ̑ı@yök%%) it means that the
marked noun phrase is either excluded from being the subject of the committed
act of the predicate or that the act itself was committed but by something other
than the marked noun phrase.

### Causee / Involuntary Subject

The %%ölë@ölë%%/%%ɽıʓʇ@ölë%% particle precedes this noun phrase.

During causative sentences, a NP with this role will represent the *causee*.
Otherwise, an NP with this role will be the agent or experiencer of the action.
The nature of this role is that the marked noun phrase is **not** making the
choice to commit the act of their own free will. Either they are bound/forced to
do so or they do not have the wherewithal to make a conscious choice on the
matter and are acting out of some basic instinst.

When used with the negatitive particle (%%yök / ɀ̑ı@yök%%) it has the same
semantic interpretation as the voluntary subject particle.

### Patient, Theme, Stimulus (Direct Object)

The %%cö@cö%%/%%ꞇı@cö%% particle precedes this noun phrase.

This role is used in predicates with transitive verbs that have an argument. The
argument can represent a *patient* (an entity that undergoes the action and
changes state), a *theme* (an entity that undergoes the action but does not
change state), or a *stimulus* (an entity that prompts sensory or emotional
feeling). In English, this represents some of the senses of the word "to" and
"into" (many English verbs don't rely on a preposition particle to
introduce their direct object).

:::caution Base Verbs Without This Particle

Not using this particle can have an impact on how base verb sentences are
interpreted. Without providing a direct object, a base verb is interpreted as
being *intransitive* or in an unthematic and generic manner (since no theme is
being provided).

:::

A **patient** is an entity that undergoes the action and changes state in some
manner. A **theme** is an entiy that undergoes the action but doesn't change
state. A **stimulus** is an entity that prompts or triggers the emotional or
sensory action that is being described. These kinds of direct objects aren't
separately marked because which kind of object is being specified can be
determined from the verb that is being used. The only thing that you must
remember is that only base verbs can take a preposition of this kind. **A
sentence with a base modifier or base noun being used as a verb cannot contain
this preposition.**

When used with the negatitive particle (%%yök / ɀ̑ı@yök%%), it means that the
marked noun phrase is either excluded from being the argument of the committed
act of the predicate or that the act itself was committed but with an object
that is something other than the marked noun phrase.

### Instrument or Manner

The %%vio@vio%%/%%ɤɟɽ@vio%% particle precedes this noun phrase.

This role is used for NPs that represent some entity that was used to carry out
the action. It can also represent the way or manner with which the action was
carried out. In English, this represents some of the senses of the words "with",
"using", and "via".

:::info Thematic Relations

This preposition and the remaining described here can be used with intransitive
and transitive verb predicates and are only needed in certain circumstances when
extra thematic information is useful to describing the predicate in a new way.
These prepositions are known as **true thematic relations**. Subjects and
objects are honorary members of the thematic relation club since they are
usually called **morphosyntactic arguments**. They are included in the same
class of word as the true thematic relations to simplify the grammatical system.
This system is what allows the language to have complete **free constituent
ordering**.

:::

When used with the negatitive particle (%%yök / ɀ̑ı@yök%%), it means that the
marked noun phrase is either excluded from being the manner of instrument of the
committed act of the predicate or that the act itself was committed but in a
manner or with an object that is something other than the marked noun phrase. In
English, this represents some of the senses of the word "without".

### Location or Time

The %%hoi@hoi%%/%%ɂɽɟ@hoi%% particle precedes this noun phrase.

This role is used for NPs that represent where or when the action occurs. In
English, this represents some of the senses of the words "in", "at", and "on".

When used with the negatitive particle (%%yök / ɀ̑ı@yök%%), it means that the
marked noun phrase is either excluded from being the location or time of the
committed act of the predicate or that the act itself was committed but at a
location or time that is somewhere other than the marked noun phrase.

### Direction or Destination (Indirect Object)

The %%müt@müt%%/%%ƶ̆ʄ@müt%% particle precedes this noun phrase.

This role is used for NPs that represent where the action is directed towards.
In English, this represents some of the senses of the words "to", "into", and
"towards". Any time you might need an **indrect object** or *recipient, you can
use this preposition to describe that constituent.

:::info Reciprocity

When you use this preposition with an NP of "%%xokön@xokön%% %%dizel@dizel%%",
it means that the predicate is a reciprocal action which means that it happened
between the subjects instead of the subjects directing that action towards some
other referred entity.

:::

When used with the negatitive particle (%%yök / ɀ̑ı@yök%%), it means that the
marked noun phrase is either excluded from being the recipient of the committed
act of the predicate or that the act itself was committed but with recipient
that is something other than the marked noun phrase.

### Source or Origin

The %%sün@sün%%/%%ɐ̃ʄ@sün%% particle precedes this noun phrase.

This role is used for NPs that represent where the action originated. In
English, this represents some of the senses of the word "from".

When used with the negatitive particle (%%yök / ɀ̑ı@yök%%), it means that the
marked noun phrase is either excluded from being the source or origin of the
committed act of the predicate or that the act itself was committed but with a
source or origin that is something other than the marked noun phrase.

### Beneficiary or Purpose

The %%oxon@oxon%%/%%ɽɋ̃@oxon%% particle precedes this noun phrase.

This role is used for NPs that represent for whose benefit the action occurs or
the reason for the action. In English, this represents some of the senses of the
word "for".

When used with the negatitive particle (%%yök / ɀ̑ı@yök%%), it means that the
marked noun phrase is either excluded from being the beneficiary/purpose of the
committed act of the predicate or that the act itself was committed but with a
beneficiary/purpose that is something other than the marked noun phrase.

### Cause

The %%nënko@nënko%%/%%ƨ̃ʇɔ@nënko%% particle precedes this noun phrase.

This role is used for NPs that represent what caused the action to occur or a
past reason that led to the action. In English, this represents some of the
senses of the word "because".

When used with the negatitive particle (%%yök / ɀ̑ı@yök%%), it means that the
marked noun phrase is either excluded from being the cause of the committed
act of the predicate or that the act itself was committed but with a cause
that is something other than the marked noun phrase. In English, this represents
some of the senses of the word "despite".

### Collaborator

The %%ovek@ovek%%/%%ɽɤ̑ɿ@ovek%% particle precedes this noun phrase.

This role is used for NPs that represent a fellow actor that is also engaged in
the same action as the subject. However, the NP is not considered a subject of
the sentence. In English, this represents some of the senses of the word
"with".

When used with the negatitive particle (%%yök / ɀ̑ı@yök%%), it means that the
marked noun phrase is either excluded from participating in the committed
act of the predicate or that the act itself was committed but with a participant
that is something other than the marked noun phrase. In English, this represents
some of the senses of the word "without".

### Context or Condition

The %%win@win%%/%%ʒ̃ɟ@win%% particle precedes this noun phrase.

This role is used for NPs that represent an overarching topic, contextual
detail, or a condition for the underlying sentence. In English, this represents
some of the senses of the words "regarding", "given", "as for", and "when".

When used with the negatitive particle (%%yök / ɀ̑ı@yök%%), it means that the
marked noun phrase is either excluded from being the topic or context of the
committed act of the predicate or that the act itself was committed but with a
topic/context that is something other than the marked noun phrase. In English,
this represents some of the senses of the word "regardless".

### Counter-Agent

The %%dën@dën%%/%%ʌ̃ʇ@dën%% particle precedes this noun phrase.

This role is used for NPs that either represent a special kind of goal/agent for
verbs that indicates an opposing agent for verbs that indicate an action that is
*oppositional* (where both sides are engaging in an opposing action). In
English, this represents some of the senses of the word "against".

When used with the negatitive particle (%%yök / ɀ̑ı@yök%%), it means that the
marked noun phrase is either excluded from being the counter-agent of the
committed act of the predicate or that the act itself was committed but with a
counter-agent that is something other than the marked noun phrase.

### Evidence

The %%üc@üc%%/%%ɽ̄ʄ@üc%% particle precedes this noun phrase.

This role is used for NPs that represent proof or an information source that the
specified action is known or believed to have occurred, is occurring, or will
occur. In English, this represents some of the senses of the phrase "or so".

When used with the negatitive particle (%%yök / ɀ̑ı@yök%%), it means that the
marked noun phrase is either excluded from being the proof/source of the
committed act of the predicate or that the act itself was committed but with
proof or a source that is something other than the marked noun phrase.

### Distance or Duration

The %%lon@lon%%/%%ʓ̃@lon%% particle precedes this noun phrase.

This role is used for NPs that represent the time or space that the action
occurs within. This role is related to the location/time role but it represents
finite physical space or actual time periods. In English, this represents some
of the senses of the word "for".

When used with the negatitive particle (%%yök / ɀ̑ı@yök%%), it means that the
marked noun phrase is either excluded from being the distance ordutation of the
committed act of the predicate or that the act itself was committed but with a
duration or distance that is something other than the marked noun phrase.

### Intermediate

The %%gıtno@gıtno%%/%%ꜿ̆ȷƨ@gıtno%% particle precedes this noun phrase.

This role is used for either a NP that represents the a time or physical entity
that the action occurs between or a conjunction of two NPs that represent two
boundaries in time or space that the action occurs between. In English, this
represents some of the senses of the word "between".

When used with the negatitive particle (%%yök / ɀ̑ı@yök%%), it means that the
marked noun phrase is either excluded from being the intermediary entity of the
committed act of the predicate or that the act itself was committed but with an
intermediary that is something other than the marked noun phrase.

### Genitive

The %%yë@yë%%/%%ɀʇ@yë%% particle precedes this noun phrase.

This role is used for a NP that is describing the preceding noun or verb phrase
in some contextually dependent manner. In English, this represents some of the
senses of the word "of".

This particle isn't used with the negatitive particle (%%yök / ɀ̑ı@yök%%)
because it's meant to describe nouns through associating other nouns and there's
already an existing way to describe zero nouns (%%xünyu / ɋ̃ʄɀʃ@xünyu%%). You can
achieve a similar kind of negative association by using a relative clause.

## From...

Converting from the other content types into nouns.

### Verbs

When a verb acts as a noun, it represents an archetypal object that has or will
be involved in the happening of that verb action. Like "-ed" in English but also
there are many concrete terms that English has to refer to these entities
already. These are direct objects, patients and themes that would be logical to
use in a sentence where you use that verb.

### Modifiers

When a modifier acts as a noun, it means an uncountable quality and/or degree of
being a given state. Like the affix "-ness" in English. One way of making a noun
out of a modifier is to provide it as the nucleus of a preposition phrase.
Preposition particles always take the word is immediately following it as a noun
derivation of that word and it is the nucleus of the preposition phrase.

<Tabs groupId="popöun-kon-cukto" queryString>
  <TabItem value="latin" label="Latin" default>
    %%pön@pön%% %%ü@ü%% %%wölık@wölık%% %%cö@cö%% %%küyö@küyö%%
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="opügido" label="ɽʋʄꜿɟʌ">
    %%ʋ̃ı@pön%% %%ɽʄ@ü%% %%ʒıʓ̑ȷ@wölık%% %%ꞇı@cö%% %%ɔʄɀı@küyö%%
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

Another way is to create a genitive phrase by preceding the modifier with the
%%yë@yë%%/%%ɀʇ@yë%% particle. This particle means that whatever word type that the word
immediately following it is, take the noun derivation of that word type.

This is especially useful for the typical reason that genitive phrases are
useful: it allows you to describe a quality with some modifiers of its own. One
of the most common usages is when adding a degree to a modifier:

<Tabs groupId="popöun-kon-cukto" queryString>
  <TabItem value="latin" label="Latin" default>
    %%töxücı@töxücı%% %%pümi@pümi%% %%yë@yë%% %%ıwotë@ıwotë%% %%ëto@ëto%%
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="opügido" label="ɽʋʄꜿɟʌ">
    %%cıɋʄꞇȷ@töxücı%% %%ʋʄƶɟ@pümi%% %%ɀʇ@yë%% %%ɽȷʒcʇ@ıwotë%% %%ɽʇc@ëto%%
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

Since Hisyëö has less than 800 words, using genitive phrases with modifiers
allows you to create more complex phrases that would require several sentences
to formulate otherwise. 

## Noun Clauses

A noun can be concrete or abstract, it doesn't have to be some physical entity
or even a finite state. It can be a process or really anything that you might
want to refer to and use as a subject or object of a sentence. In Hisyëö, you
can create these complex nouns by building sentences within a special clause
called a **Noun Clause**. In order to create one of these clauses, you must
start with a particle. There are two special words available that can be used
to introduce a noun clause:

<Tabs groupId="popöun-kon-cukto" queryString>
    <TabItem value="latin" label="Latin" default>
        <ol>
          <li>%%do@do%% - Use this one for infinitives and gerunds</li>
          <li>%%vos@vos%% - Use this one for complete inner sentences</li>
        </ol>
    </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="opügido" label="ɽʋʄꜿɟʌ">
        <ol>
          <li>%%ʌ@do%% - Use this one for infinitives and gerunds</li>
          <li>%%ɤ́@vos%% - Use this one for complete inner sentences</li>
        </ol>
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

After this particle, you start your sentence. In the infinitive/gerund form, you
do not provide an agent/experiencer (subject) of the sentence because this is
the nature of how infinitives are used: a noun that refers to the meaning
expressed by the inner sentence but referred holisitically as an object in the
outer sentence.

<Tabs groupId="popöun-kon-cukto" queryString>
    <TabItem value="latin" label="Latin" default>
        %%ëo@ëo%% %%govon@govon%% %%ölë@ölë%% %%noyo@noyo%% %%ü@ü%% <strong>%%do@do%%</strong> %%cöüvon@cöüvon%% %%cö@cö%% %%micin@micin%%. "to cook fish makes me disgusted"
    </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="opügido" label="ɽʋʄꜿɟʌ">
        %%ɽʇɽ@ëo%% %%ꜿɤ̃@govon%% %%ɽıʓʇ@ölë%% %%ƨɀ@noyo%% %%ɽʄ@ü%% <strong>%%ʌ@do%%</strong> %%ꞇıɽʄɤ̃@cöüvon%% %%ꞇı@cö%% %%micin@micin%%. "to cook fish makes me disgusted"
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

:::caution Beware the similarity between gerunds and the abstract particle

While these noun clause gerunds are very useful, you must be careful to discern
the distinction of meaning between the gerund usage of a noun clause leading
particle and the abstract particle preceding a content word. The abstract form
should be thought of as "acts of" or "matters of" which should be seen as more
of a loose relationship than using a noun clause as a gerund. "acts/matters of
eating meat" means something different from "eating meat".

<Tabs groupId="popöun-kon-cukto" queryString>
    <TabItem value="latin" label="Latin" default>
        <p>%%toüyen@toüyen%% %%ü@ü%% %%noyo@noyo%% %%cö@cö%% %%do@do%% %%mokon@mokon%% %%cö@cö%% %%oksün@oksün%%.</p>
        <p>%%toüyen@toüyen%% %%ü@ü%% %%noyo@noyo%% %%cö@cö%% %%kon@kon%% %%mokon@mokon%% %%oksün@oksün%%.</p>
    </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="opügido" label="ɽʋʄꜿɟʌ">
        <p>%%cɽʄɀ̃ɿ@toüyen%% %%ɽʄ@ü%% %%ƨɀ@noyo%% %%ꞇı@cö%% %%ʌ@do%% %%ƶɔ̃@mokon%% %%ꞇı@cö%% %%ɽ̑ɐɟɽ́ı@oksiös%%.</p>
        <p>%%cɽʄɀ̃ɿ@toüyen%% %%ɽʄ@ü%% %%ƨɀ@noyo%% %%ꞇı@cö%% %%ɔ̃@kon%% %%ƶɔ̃@mokon%% %%ɽ̑ɐɟɽ́ı@oksiös%%.</p>
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

The first sentence implies that the speaker hates specifically the act of eating
meat whereas the second sentence implies that the speaker hates matters of meat
eating altogether which broadens the hate to the act of discussing or thinking
about it. 

:::

The other form of noun phrase (%%vos@vos%%/%%ɤ́@vos%%) includes a subject or if one is not provided then,
like a normal sentence, it should be intepreted as "there is" or "it is"
depending on the predicate that is provided. This form of noun phrase is useful
when you need to introduce a clause that changes (or removes) the subject from
the underlying sentence. Some verbs primarily are used with some form of noun
clause as their object and this form allows for a complete sentence to be
included as that object.

<Tabs groupId="popöun-kon-cukto" queryString>
    <TabItem value="latin" label="Latin" default>
        <p>%%völun@völun%% %%ü@ü%% %%noyo@noyo%% %%cö@cö%% %%vos@vos%% %%völun@völun%% %%ü@ü%% %%nimü@nimü%% %%cö@cö%% %%noyo@noyo%% "I want you to want me"</p>
        <p>%%xiwon@xiwon%% %%ü@ü%% %%noyo@noyo%% %%cö@cö%% %%vos@vos%% %%suhot@suhot%% %%tiü@tiü%% "I wish that it was 5 o'clock</p>
    </TabItem>
    <TabItem value="opügido" label="ɽʋʄꜿɟʌ">
        <p>%%ɤıʓ̃ʃ@völun%% %%ɽʄ@ü%% %%ƨɀ@noyo%% %%ꞇı@cö%% %%ɤ́@vos%% %%ɤıʓ̃ʃ@völun%% %%ɽʄ@ü%% %%ƨɟƶʄ@nimü%% %%ꞇı@cö%% %%ƨɀ@noyo%% "I want you to want me"</p>
        <p>%%ɋɟʒ̃@xiwon%% %%ɽʄ@ü%% %%ƨɀ@noyo%% %%ꞇı@cö%% %%ɤ́@vos%% %%ɐʃɂ̆@suhot%% %%cɟɽʄ@tiü%% "I wish that it was 5 o'clock</p>
    </TabItem>
</Tabs>

:::note English indirect object

The English sentence in the translation above "I want you to want me" is using
an indirect object of "you" and an direct object infinitve phrase of "to want
me". This might seem like the wrong translation since there is a preposition
that Hisyëö typically uses for indirect objects. This is just an example of some
of the irregular English grammar around the use of the verb "to want". In
Hisyëö, the best translation is to use a finite noun phrase where the indirect
object of the English sentence is now the subject of the inner noun clause.

:::

There are other uses of these same particles as relative clause introducers and
you can learn more about those usages in the Modifiers chapter.