---
sidebar_position: 2
---

# Verbs

A type of word that represents an action. Each sentence will always have a verb
phrase. The particles that introduce them are referred to as "prepositions"
because the particle is positioned before the verb phrase. The verb phrase that
they mark is known as the predicate or main content verb of the sentence. 

## Prepositions

### Realis

The most basic form of verbal preposition is the realis form. Using this verb
particle (%%lı@lı%%/%%ʓȷ@lı%%) means that your verb is a true statement of an
action or state that occurred or was experienced in reality. They can be in the
past, present or future tense but they are, by default, considered to be
imperfective and not perfect

:::tip Skip the Particle

If you start your sentence with this form of verb, you don't need to have a
leading particle. It is implied automatically when a sentence begins without a
particle.

:::



### Irrealis

There are a few different irrealis verb markers that allow for a variety of
different moods indicating that the predicate has not occurred (or isn't known
to have). 

#### Epistemic (*what could be*)

This irrealis verb marker (%%köi@köi%%/%%ɔıɽɟ@köi%%) indicates that the
predicate *could* or *might* happen. This marker tells you that the
speaker/writer either believes or has knowledge that the predicate may occur but
isn't confident that this future reality is assured or that the possibility of
it occurring doesn't necessitate that it will be.

#### Conditional (*what would be*)

The conditional verb marker (%%pit@pit%%/%%ʋ̆ɟ@pit%%) indicates that the
predicate occurring is dependent on some other circumstance that is either
explicitly described or implied.

#### Deontic (*what should be*)

Finally, we have the deontic verb marker (%%küu@küu%%/%%ɔʄɽʃ@küu%%) which is
indicates that the writer/speaker believes the predicate should or ought to be
happen.

### Future

There is a form of verbal preposition that is on a slightly different dimension
from the realis/irrealis verb markers above. Instead of delineating the mood of
the sentence, this marker indicates that the predicate will occur in the future.
This marker (%%ke@ke%%/%%ɔɿ@ke%%) indicates what linguists call the **future
tense**.

## From...

Converting from the other content types into verbs.

### Nouns

When a noun acts as a verb, it means that the predicate will be *copulative*,
meaning that the verb is the English verb "be" followed by that noun. This is
called a **noun complement**. The subject is being described as being some noun.
This has the effect of meaning "is a [noun]" in English.


### Modifiers

When a modifier acts as a verb, it means that predicate will be *copulative*,
meaning that the verb is a combination of the English verb "be" followed by that
modifier. This is called a **modifier complement**. The subject is being
described as being some modifier. This has the effect of meaning "is [modifier]"
in English.

## Verb Modifiers

There are three **verb modifiers** that can be mixed-and-matched in a verb phrase.

### Negatitive

The negatitive verb modifier (%%yök@yök%% / %%ɀ̑ı@yök%%) turns the verb phrase
into the negated version of itself. In English, this is the "not" adverb.

### Causative

The causative verb modifier (%%ëo@ëo%% / %%ɽʇɽ@ëo%%) turns the verb phrase into
the causative version of itself. In English, this is often accomplished using
the "to make" helper verb but sometimes there is a completely separate verb for
the causative version of an action.

### Perfective

The perfective verb modifier (%%si@si%% / %%ɐɟ@si%%) turns the verb phrase into
the perfective version of itself. This describes the action as being a complete
whole in contrast to the default aspect of verbs which is known as
*imperfective*. There is no equivalent helper verb in English, sometimes the
verb used to describe a whole action is completely different from the verb used
to describe the action in the imperfective aspect.